add announcement blog post for Flink 1.18 (#680)
apache/flink-web: docs/content/posts/2023-10-10-release-1.18.0.md

---
authors:
- JingGe:
  name: "Jing Ge"
  twitter: jingengineer
- KonstantinKnauf:
  name: "Konstantin Knauf"
  twitter: snntrable
- SergeyNuyanzin:
  name: "Sergey Nuyanzin"
  twitter: uckamello
- QingshengRen:
  name: "Qingsheng Ren"
  twitter: renqstuite
date: "2023-10-10T08:00:00Z"
subtitle: ""
title: Announcing the Release of Apache Flink 1.18
aliases:
- /news/2023/10/10/release-1.18.0.html
---

The Apache Flink PMC is pleased to announce the release of Apache Flink 1.18.0. As usual, we are looking at a packed 
release with a wide variety of improvements and new features. Overall, 176 people contributed to this release completing 
18 FLIPS and 700+ issues. Thank you!

Let's dive into the highlights.

# Towards a Streaming Lakehouse

## Flink SQL Improvements

> ### Introduce Flink JDBC Driver For Sql Gateway 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Introduce Flink JDBC Driver For SQL Gateway 
```

Flink 1.18 comes with a JDBC Driver for the Flink SQL Gateway. So, you can now use any SQL Client that supports JDBC to 

> interact with your tables via Flink SQL. Here is an example using [SQLLine](https://julianhyde.github.io/sqlline/manual.html). 

Reviewer 2: Are we ok linking to what looks like a personal repository that has not been updated for over a year for our example.

Reviewer 3: based on license it should be ok
this tool is used by  Apache Calcite, Apache Drill, APache Phoenix and other projects
There is no new features and that's the reason it was not updated

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>      a INT,
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>      b VARCHAR(10)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>  ) WITH (
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>      'connector' = 'filesystem',
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>      'path' = 'file:///tmp/T.csv',
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>      'format' = 'csv'
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>  );
No rows affected (0.122 seconds)
0: jdbc:flink://localhost:8083> INSERT INTO T VALUES (1, 'Hi'), (2, 'Hello');
+----------------------------------+
|              job id              |
+----------------------------------+
| fbade1ab4450fc57ebd5269fdf60dcfd |
+----------------------------------+
1 row selected (1.282 seconds)
0: jdbc:flink://localhost:8083> SELECT * FROM T;
+---+-------+
| a |   b   |
+---+-------+
| 1 | Hi    |
| 2 | Hello |
+---+-------+
2 rows selected (1.955 seconds)
0: jdbc:flink://localhost:8083>
```

**More Information**
* [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/jdbcdriver/) 
* [FLIP-293: Introduce Flink Jdbc Driver For Sql Gateway](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-293%3A+Introduce+Flink+Jdbc+Driver+For+Sql+Gateway)

### Stored Procedures

> Stored Procedures provide a convenient way to encapsulate complex logic to perform data manipulation or administrative 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Stored Procedures provide a convenient way to encapsulate complex logic to perform data manipulations or administrative 
```

> ### Stored Procedures
> 
> Stored Procedures provide a convenient way to encapsulate complex logic to perform data manipulation or administrative 
> tasks in Apache Flink itself. Therefore， Flink introduces the support for calling stored procedures. 
> Flink now allows catalog developers to develop their own built-in stored procedures and then enables users to call these
> predefined stored procedures.

Reviewer: Here is a revised description of the new support for stored procedures. I think it provides better motivation for the feature, and is more clear about the intended audience & benefits to users.

```suggestion
### Stored Procedure Support for Flink Connectors

Stored procedures have been an indispensable tool in traditional databases,
offering a convenient way to encapsulate complex logic for data manipulation
and administrative tasks. They also offer the potential for enhanced
performance, since they can trigger the handling of data operations directly
within an external database. Other popular data systems like Trino and Iceberg
automate and simplify common maintenance tasks into small sets of procedures,
which greatly reduces users' administrative burden.

This new update primarily targets developers of Flink connectors, who can now
predefine custom stored procedures into connectors via the Catalog interface.
The primary benefit to users is that connector-specific tasks that previously
may have required writing custom Flink code can now be replaced with simple
calls that encapsulate, standardize, and potentially optimize the underlying
operations. Users can execute procedures using the familiar `CALL` syntax, and
discover a connector's available procedures with `SHOW PROCEDURES`. Stored
procedures within connectors improves the extensibility of Flink's SQL and
Table APIs, and should unlock smoother data access and management for users.
```

Author: Awesome. Thank you!

**More Information**
* [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/procedures/)
* [FLIP-311: Support Call Stored Procedure](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-311%3A+Support+Call+Stored+Procedure)

### Extended DDL Support

From this release onwards, Flink supports

- `REPLACE TABLE AS SELECT`
- `CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE AS SELECT`

and both these commands and previously supported `CREATE TABLE AS` can now support atomicity provided the underlying 

> connector supports this.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
connector also supports this.
```

> Moreover, Apache Flink now supports TRUNCATE TABLE in batch execution mode. As before, the underlying connector needs 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Moreover, Apache Flink now supports TRUNCATE TABLE in batch execution mode. Same as before, the underlying connector needs 
```

to implement and provide this capability

> And, finally, we have also added support for adding, dropping and listing partitions via

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
And, finally, we have also implemented support for adding, dropping and listing partitions via
```

- `ALTER TABLE ADD PARTITION`
- `ALTER TABLE DROP PARTITION`
- `SHOW PARTITIONS`

**More Information**
- [Documentation on TRUNCATE](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/sql/truncate/)
- [Documentation on CREATE OR REPLACE](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/sql/create/#create-or-replace-table)
- [Documentation on ALTER TABLE](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/sql/alter/#alter-table)
- [FLIP-302: Support TRUNCATE TABLE statement in batch mode](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-302%3A+Support+TRUNCATE+TABLE+statement+in+batch+mode)
- [FLIP-303: Support REPLACE TABLE AS SELECT statement](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-303%3A+Support+REPLACE+TABLE+AS+SELECT+statement)
- [FLIP-305: Support atomic for CREATE TABLE AS SELECT(CTAS) statement](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-305%3A+Support+atomic+for+CREATE+TABLE+AS+SELECT%28CTAS%29+statement)

> ### Time Travelling

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Time Traveling
```

Reviewer 4: Seeing that the blog post follows US English, it's better be consistent with traveling (in US English) VS travelling (in UK English).

Flink supports the time travel SQL syntax for querying historical versions of data that allows users to specify a point 
in time and retrieve the data and schema of a table as it appeared at that time. With time travel, users can easily 
analyze and compare historical versions of data.

**More information**
- [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/sql/queries/time-travel/)
- [FLIP-308: Support Time Travel](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-308%3A+Support+Time+Travel)

## Streaming Execution Improvements

> ### Support Operator-Level State TTL

Reviewer 6: Datastream API already supports configure operator-level state TTL, we shall give a clear description.
```suggestion
### Support Operator-Level State TTL in Table API & SQL
```

This means that for scenarios like stream regular joins, users can now set different TTLs for the left and right 
streams. In previous versions, state expiration could only be controlled at the pipeline level using the configuration 
`table.exec.state.ttl`. With the introduction of operator-level state retention, users can now optimize resource 
usage according to their specific requirements.

**More Information**
- [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/concepts/overview/#configure-operator-level-state-ttl)
- [FLIP-292: Enhance COMPILED PLAN to support operator-level state TTL configuration](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-292%3A+Enhance+COMPILED+PLAN+to+support+operator-level+state+TTL+configuration)

### Watermark Alignment and Idleness Detection in SQL

You can now configure [watermark alignment](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/datastream/event-time/generating_watermarks/#watermark-alignment) 
and [source idleness timeouts](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/datastream/event-time/generating_watermarks/#dealing-with-idle-sources) 

> in pure SQL via hints. Previously, these features were only available in the DataStream API.

Reviewer 6: I think we shall point to the docs to tell users how to use this feature.
```suggestion
in [pure SQL via hints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/concepts/time_attributes/#advanced-watermark-features). Previously, these features were only available in the DataStream API.
```

**More Information**
- [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/sql/queries/hints/)
- [FLIP-296: Extend watermark-related features for SQL](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-296%3A+Extend+watermark-related+features+for+SQL)

## Batch Execution Improvements

### Hybrid Shuffle supports Remote Storage

Hybrid Shuffle supports storing the shuffle data in remote storage. The remote storage path can be configured with the 
option `taskmanager.network.hybrid-shuffle.remote.path`. Hybrid Shuffle uses less network memory than before by 
decoupling the memory usage from the number of parallelisms, improving the stability and ease of use. 

> For more detailed 

Reviewer 2: This sentence has a line break in it

> information, please refer to 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
information, please refer to:
```

**More Information**
* [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/ops/batch/batch\_shuffle/#hybrid-shuffle)
* [FLIP-301: Hybrid Shuffle supports Remote Storage](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-301%3A+Hybrid+Shuffle+supports+Remote+Storage)

### Performance Improvements & TPC-DS Benchmark

> In previous releases, the community has done a lot of work to improve batch processing performance, which has led to 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In previous releases, the community worked extensively to improve Flink's batch processing performance, which has led to 
```

> significant improvements. In this release cycle, community contributors have continued to put a lot of effort into 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
significant improvements. In this release cycle, community contributors continued to put significant effort into 
```

> improving batch performance.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
further improving Flink's batch performance.
```

#### Runtime Filter for Flink SQL

> Runtime filter is a common optimization to improve join performance. It is designed to dynamically generate filter 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Runtime filter is a common method for optimizing Join performance. It is designed to dynamically generate filter 
```

conditions for certain Join queries at runtime to reduce the amount of scanned or shuffled data, avoid unnecessary I/O 
and network transmission, and speed up the query. We introduced runtime filters in Flink 1.18, and verified its 

> effectiveness through the TPC-DS benchmark, and observed up to 3x speedup for some queries by enabling this feature.

Reviewer 2: is there a documentation link for this?

#### Operator Fusion Codegen for Flink SQL

Operator Fusion Codegen improves the execution performance of a query by fusing an operator DAG into a single optimized 
operator that eliminates virtual function calls, leverages CPU registers for intermediate data and reduces the 
instruction cache miss. As a general technical optimization, we verified its effectiveness through TPC-DS, and 

> only some batch operators completed fusion codegen support in version 1.18, getting significant performance gains on 

Reviewer 2: I am not sure what "only some batch operators completed fusion codegen support in version 1.18" means. Do we need the word "only". I am curious which batch operators completed fusion codegen support in version 1.18.

Reviewer 7: Currently, only three batch operators: Calc, HashAgg, and HashJoin support it.

Reviewer 2: > Currently, only three batch operators: Calc, HashAgg, and HashJoin support it.

It would be good to be explicit here.

some query.

Note that both features are considered experimental and disabled by default in Flink 1.18. 

> They can be enabled using `table.optimizer.runtime-filter.enabled` and `able.exec.operator-fusion-codegen.enabled` 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
They can be enabled by using `table.optimizer.runtime-filter.enabled` and `able.exec.operator-fusion-codegen.enabled` 
```

> respectively.

Reviewer 2: Can we add whether we want feedback on these features, and why they are considered experimental and some words around when these will cease to be experimental.

Author: Happy to add this. TBH I don't know why they are considered experimental. @lsyldliu do you know?

Reviewer 8: @lsyldliu It will be great if you can help address the comment

Reviewer 7: After checking the two options' definitions of source code, I think we can remove the `experimental ` description, we don't need to emphasize it. In addition, it would be better to add some content about gaining user feedback.

Since Flink 1.16, the Apache Flink Community has been continuously tracking the performance of its batch engine via the 

> TPC-DS benchmarking framework. After significant improvements in Flink 1.17 (dynamic join-reordering, 

Reviewer 7: It should be `Flink 1.18 (runtime filter, operator fusion codegen) lead to 12% performance improvement compared to Flink 1.17

dynamic local aggregations), the two improvements described in the previous sections lead to 12% performance improvement

> compared to Flink 1.17 , a 35% performance improvement compared to Flink 1.16 on a 10T dataset for partitioned tables.

Reviewer 2: Can we add a link to the benchmark details and its data?

Reviewer 7: https://github.com/ververica/flink-sql-benchmark

<div style="text-align: center;">
<img src="/img/blog/2023-10-10-release-1.18.0/tpc-ds-benchmark.png" style="width:90%;margin:15px">
</div>

**More Information**
* [FLIP-324: Introduce Runtime Filter for Flink Batch Jobs](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-324%3A+Introduce+Runtime+Filter+for+Flink+Batch+Jobs)
* [FLIP-315: Support Operator Fusion Codegen for Flink SQL](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-315+Support+Operator+Fusion+Codegen+for+Flink+SQL)

# Towards Cloud-Native Elasticity

> Elasticity describes the ability of a system to adapt to workload changes in a non-disruptive ideally automatic manner.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Elasticity describes the ability of a system to adapt to workload changes in a non-disruptive, ideally automatic manner.
```

It is a defining characteristic of cloud-native systems and for long-running streaming workloads it is particularly 

> important. As such elasticity improvements are an area of continuous investment in the Apache Flink community. 

Reviewer 2: comma after As such.

> important. As such elasticity improvements are an area of continuous investment in the Apache Flink community. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
important. As such, elasticity improvements are an area of continuous investment in the Apache Flink community. 
```

Recent initiatives include the Kubernetes 
[Autoscaler](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-kubernetes-operator-docs-release-1.6/docs/custom-resource/autoscaler/), 
numerous improvements to rescaling performance and last but not least 

> the [Adaptive Scheduler](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/#adaptive-scheduler).

Reviewer 2: I assume we will change the docs link to be 1.18 in the final release notes

Author: Yes, I will do a find+replace.

Apache Flink deployment. At its core, it allows jobs to change their resource requirements and parallelism during 
runtime. In addition, it also adapts to the available resources in the cluster by only rescaling once the cluster can 
satisfy the minimum required resources of the job. 

Until Flink 1.18, the adaptive scheduler was primarily used in
[Reactive Mode](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/#reactive-mode), which meant that a single job by design would always use all the available resources in the cluster. Please see [this blog post](https://flink.apache.org/2021/05/06/scaling-flink-automatically-with-reactive-mode/) on how to autoscale Flink Jobs in Reactive Mode using a Horizontal Pod Autoscaler on Kubernetes.

With Flink 1.18 the adaptive scheduler becomes much more powerful and more widely applicable and is on a trajectory to becoming the default scheduler for streaming workloads on Apache Flink.

## Dynamic Fine-Grained Rescaling via REST API

Despite the underlying capabilities of the Adaptive Scheduler, the ability to change the resource requirements of a 

> Job during runtime had not yet been exposed to the end user directly. This changes in Flink 1.18. You can now change 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Job during runtime has not yet been exposed to the end user directly. This changes in Flink 1.18. You can now change 
```

the parallelism of any individual task of your job via the Flink Web UI and REST API while the job is running.

{{< youtube B1NVDTazsZY >}}

Under the hood, Apache Flink performs a regular rescaling operation as soon as the required resources for the new 
parallelism have been acquired. The rescaling operation is not based on a Savepoint, but on an ordinary, periodic 
checkpoint, which means it doesn’t introduce any additional snapshot. As you can see in the video above, the rescaling
operation happens nearly instantaneously and with a very short downtime for jobs with small state size.

In conjunction with the 

> [backpressure monitor](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/ops/monitoring/back_pressure/) 

Reviewer 2: I assume we will change the docs link to be 1.18 in the final release notes

of the Apache Flink Web UI, it is now easier than ever to find and maintain an efficient, backpressure-free parallelism 
for each of the tasks:

- If a task is very busy (red), you increase the parallelism.
- If a task is mostly idle (blue), you decrease the parallelism.

<div style="text-align: center;">
<img src="/img/blog/2023-10-10-release-1.18.0/backpressure_monitor.png" style="width:90%;margin:15px">
</div>

**More Information**

> * [Documentation](missing)

Reviewer 2: I assume missing will be replaced.

Author: Yes! @dmvk Where are we on this?

* [FLIP-291: Externalized Declarative Resource Management](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-291%3A+Externalized+Declarative+Resource+Management)

## Faster Rescaling with RocksDB

The rescaling times when using RocksDB Statebackend with incremental checkpoints have been improved about 30% in the 99th quantile.

We increased the potential for parallel download from just downloading state handles in parallel to downloading individual files in parallel.

Furthermore, we deactivated write-ahead-logging for batch-inserting into the temporary RocksDB instances we use for rescaling.

<div style="text-align: center;">
<img src="/img/blog/2023-10-10-release-1.18.0/rescaling_performance.png" style="width:90%;margin:15px">
</div>

**More Information**
* [FLINK-32326](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-32326)
* [FLINK-32345](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-32345)

# Support for Java 17 

> Java 17 was released in 2021 and is the latest long term support (LTS) release of Java with an end of life in 2029. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Java 17 was released in 2021 and is the latest long-term support (LTS) release of Java with an end-of-life in 2029. 
```

So, it was about time that Apache Flink added support for it. What does this mean concretely? As of Flink 1.18, you can

> now run Apache Flink on Java 17 and the [official Docker repository](https://hub.docker.com/_/flink) includes an image 

Reviewer 2: I assume the link will be corrected for the final version , there seems to be space in the url.

Author: Its an underscore.

based on Java 17.

    docker pull flink:1.18.0-java17

If your cluster runs on Java 17, this of course, also allows you to use Java 17 features in your user programs and to
compile it to a target version of Java 17.

**More Information**
* [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/java_compatibility/)
* [FLINK-15736](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-15736)

# Others Improvements

## Production-Ready Watermark Alignment

Supported as “Beta” since Flink 1.16 and Flink 1.17, 
[watermark alignment](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/datastream/event-time/generating_watermarks/#watermark-alignment) 

> has by now been thoroughly tested at scale in the real world. Over that time the community has collected and addressed 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
has been thoroughly tested at scale in the real world. Over that time the community has collected and addressed 
```

bugs and performance issues as they were discovered. With the resolution of these issues, we are now happy to recommend 
watermark alignment for general use.

**More Information**
* [FLINK-32548](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-32548)

## Pluggable Failure Handling

> Apache Flink serves as the foundation for numerous stream processing platforms at companies like Apple, Netflix or uber. It is also the basis for various commercial stream processing services. Therefore, its ability to easily integrate into the wider ecosystem of these internal as well as vendor platforms becomes increasingly important. The catalog modification listener and pluggable failure handlers fall into this category of improvements.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Apache Flink serves as the foundation for numerous stream processing platforms at companies like Apple, Netflix or Uber. It is also the basis for various commercial stream processing services. Therefore, its ability to easily integrate into the wider ecosystem of these internal as well as vendor platforms becomes increasingly important. The catalog modification listener and pluggable failure handlers fall into this category of improvements.
```

**More Information**
* [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/advanced/failure_enrichers/)
* [FLIP-304: Pluggable Failure Enrichers](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-304%3A+Pluggable+failure+handling+for+Apache+Flink)

## SQL Client Quality of Life Improvements

In 1.18 as a part of [FLIP-189](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-189%3A+SQL+Client+Usability+Improvements), 

> SQL client received some major updates. It became more colorful with the ability to enable SQL syntax highlighting

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the SQL client received some major updates. It became more colorful with the ability to enable SQL syntax highlighting
```

and switching among 7 different color schemes [FLINK-24909](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-24909). 

> In 1.16 there was upgraded JLine which is the underlying Flink SQL client engine. With the upgrade it became possible 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In Flink 1.16 there was an upgrade to JLine which is the underlying Flink SQL client engine. With the upgrade it became possible 
```

> to edit and navigate through very large queries like larger than one screen. And in 1.18 another JLine’s feature is 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
to edit and navigate through very large queries like larger than one screen. And in Flink 1.18 another JLine feature is 
```

> coming: now it’s possible to turn line numbers off an on for the query

Reviewer 2: `JLine’s` should be `JLine`
`off an on` should be `off and on`

> coming: now it’s possible to turn line numbers off an on for the query

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
coming: it’s now possible to turn line numbers on and off for the query
```

license of future versions of Akka (2.7+) from Apache 2.0 to BSL. It was also announced that Akka 2.6, the version that 
Apache Flink uses, would receive security updates and critical bug fixes until September of 2023. As September 2023 was 
approaching, we decided to switch from Akka to [Apache Pekko](https://pekko.apache.org/) (incubating). 
Apache Pekko (incubating) is a fork of Akka 2.6.x, prior to the Akka project’s adoption of the Business Source License.
Pekko recently released Apache Pekko 1.0.0-incubating, which enabled us to already use it in Flink 1.18 - just in time.
While our mid-term plan is to drop the dependency on Akka or Pekko altogether 
(see [FLINK-29281](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-29281)), the switch to Pekko presents a good short-term 
solution and ensures that the Apache Pekko and Apache Flink Community can address critical bug fixes and security 
vulnerabilities throughout our software supply chain.

**More Information**
* [FLINK-32468](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-32468)

## Calcite Upgrade(s)

In Apache Flink 1.18, Apache Calcite was gradually upgraded from 1.29 to 1.32. The immediate benefit of these upgrades 

> are bug fixes, a smarter optimizer and performance improvements. On a parser level it now allows to have joins to be 

Reviewer 2: we should delete `to have ` in this sentence

> are bug fixes, a smarter optimizer and performance improvements. On a parser level it now allows to have joins to be 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
are bug fixes, a smarter optimizer and performance improvements. On a parser level, it now allows joins to be 
```

grouped into trees using parentheses (mentioned in SQL-92) e.g. `SELECT * FROM a JOIN (b JOIN c ON b.x = c.x) ON a.y = c.y` 
also see [CALCITE-35](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CALCITE-35). In addition, the upgrade to Calcite 1.31+ has 
unblocked the support of Session Windows via Table-Valued Functions (see 
[CALCITE-4865](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CALCITE-4865), 

> [FLINK-24024](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-24024)) and as a corollary the depreciation of the legacy 

Reviewer 2: `depreciation` should be `deprecation`

> [FLINK-24024](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-24024)) and as a corollary the depreciation of the legacy 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[FLINK-24024](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-24024)) and as a corollary the deprecation of the legacy 
```

> group window aggregations. As a drawback of these upgrades due to 

Reviewer 2: I am not sure what the sentence `As a drawback .. ` means . Should we remove the word `as`

[CALCITE-4861](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CALCITE-4861) (Optimization of chained CAST calls can lead to 
unexpected behavior), also Flink's casting behavior has slightly changed. Some corner cases might behave differently

> now: For example, casting from FLOAT/DOUBLE 9234567891.12 to INT/BIGINT has now Java behavior for overflows.

Reviewer 2: I think we are saying there are regressions of some 1.17 capability due to the upgrade of Calcite. It would be good to detail what a user should check / notice to mitigate this change

Reviewer 3: isn't mentioning of overflow behavior  enough?

**More Information**
* [FLINK-27998](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-27998)
* [FLINK-28744](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-28744)
* [FLINK-29319](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-29319)

# Upgrade Notes

The Flink community tries to ensure that upgrades are as seamless as possible.
However, certain changes may require users to make adjustments to certain parts
of the program when upgrading to version 1.18. Please refer to the 

> [release notes](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.18/release-notes/flink-1.18/)

Reviewer 2: I assume this information will be included in the release notes at the end of this link

for a comprehensive list of adjustments to make and issues to check during the
upgrading process.

# List of Contributors

The Apache Flink community would like to express gratitude to all the
contributors who made this release possible: 

> 1996fanrui,

Reviewer 6: This guy is the alias of `Rui Fan`.

Aitozi,
Akinfolami Akin-Alamu,
Alain Brown,
Aleksandr Pilipenko,
Alexander Fedulov,
Anton Kalashnikov,
Archit Goyal,
Bangui Dunn,
Benchao Li,
BoYiZhang,
Chesnay Schepler,
Chris Nauroth,
Colten Pilgreen,
Danny Cranmer,
David Christle,
David Moravek,
Dawid Wysakowicz,
Deepyaman Datta,
Dian Fu,
Dian Qi,
Dong Lin,
Eric Xiao,
Etienne Chauchot,
Feng Jin,
Ferenc Csaky,
Fruzsina Nagy,
Gabor Somogyi,
Gunnar Morling,
Gyula Fora,
HaiYang Chen,
Hang Ruan,
Hangxiang Yu,
Hanyu Zheng,
Hong Liang Teoh,
Hongshun Wang,
Huston,
Jacky Lau,
James Hughes,
Jane Chan,
Jark Wu,
Jayadeep Jayaraman,
Jia Liu,
JiangXin,
Joao Boto,
JunRuiLee,

> Junrui Lee,

Reviewer 5: Seems like a duplicate.

and [source idleness timeouts](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/datastream/event-time/generating_watermarks/#dealing-with-idle-sources) 
in [pure SQL via hints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/concepts/time_attributes/#advanced-watermark-features). Previously, these features were only available in the DataStream API.

**More Information**
- [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/table/sql/queries/hints/)
- [FLIP-296: Extend watermark-related features for SQL](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-296%3A+Extend+watermark-related+features+for+SQL)

## Batch Execution Improvements

### Hybrid Shuffle supports Remote Storage

Hybrid Shuffle supports storing the shuffle data in remote storage. The remote storage path can be configured with the 
option `taskmanager.network.hybrid-shuffle.remote.path`. Hybrid Shuffle uses less network memory than before by 
decoupling the memory usage from the number of parallelisms, improving the stability and ease of use. 

**More Information**

> * [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/ops/batch/batch\_shuffle/#hybrid-shuffle)

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
* [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/ops/batch/batch_shuffle/#hybrid-shuffle)
```

#### Operator Fusion Codegen for Flink SQL

Operator Fusion Codegen improves the execution performance of a query by fusing an operator DAG into a single optimized 
operator that eliminates virtual function calls, leverages CPU registers for intermediate data and reduces the 
instruction cache miss. As a general technical optimization, we verified its effectiveness through TPC-DS, and 
only some batch operators (Calc, HashAgg, and HashJoin) completed fusion codegen support in version 1.18, getting 
significant performance gains on some query.

Note that both features are considered experimental and disabled by default in Flink 1.18. 
They can be enabled by using `table.optimizer.runtime-filter.enabled` and `able.exec.operator-fusion-codegen.enabled` 
respectively.

Since Flink 1.16, the Apache Flink Community has been continuously tracking the performance of its batch engine via the 
TPC-DS benchmarking framework. After significant improvements in Flink 1.17 (dynamic join-reordering, 
dynamic local aggregations), the two improvements described in the previous sections lead to 12% performance improvement

> compared to Flink 1.17 , a 35% performance improvement compared to Flink 1.16 on a 10T dataset for partitioned tables.

Reviewer 10: I think the numbers 12% and 35% are the reduction of TPC-DS execution time. So actually the performance improvements numbers should be 14% and 54%.

Supported as “Beta” since Flink 1.16 and Flink 1.17, 
[watermark alignment](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/datastream/event-time/generating_watermarks/#watermark-alignment) 
has been thoroughly tested at scale in the real world. Over that time the community has collected and addressed 
bugs and performance issues as they were discovered. With the resolution of these issues, we are now happy to recommend 
watermark alignment for general use.

**More Information**
* [FLINK-32548](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-32548)

## Pluggable Failure Handling

Apache Flink serves as the foundation for numerous stream processing platforms at companies like Apple, Netflix or Uber. It is also the basis for various commercial stream processing services. Therefore, its ability to easily integrate into the wider ecosystem of these internal as well as vendor platforms becomes increasingly important. The catalog modification listener and pluggable failure handlers fall into this category of improvements.

**More Information**
* [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/deployment/advanced/failure_enrichers/)

> * [FLIP-304: Pluggable Failure Enrichers](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-304%3A+Pluggable+failure+handling+for+Apache+Flink)

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
* [FLIP-304: Pluggable Failure Enrichers](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-304%3A+Pluggable+Failure+Enrichers)
```

## SQL Client Quality of Life Improvements

In 1.18 the SQL client received a collection of usability improvements: 
* The client is now more colorful with the ability to enable SQL syntax highlighting and switching among 7 different 
color schemes
* It is now easier to edit and navigate through very large queries. 
* It is now possible to turn line numbers off and on.

More Information
* [FLIP-189: SQL Client Usability Improvements](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-189%3A+SQL+Client+Usability+Improvements)

## Apache Pekko instead of Akka

A year ago, [Lightbend announced](https://flink.apache.org/2022/09/08/regarding-akkas-licensing-change/) changing the 
license of future versions of Akka (2.7+) from Apache 2.0 to BSL. It was also announced that Akka 2.6, the version that 
Apache Flink uses, would receive security updates and critical bug fixes until September of 2023. As September 2023 was 
approaching, we decided to switch from Akka to [Apache Pekko](https://pekko.apache.org/) (incubating). 
Apache Pekko (incubating) is a fork of Akka 2.6.x, prior to the Akka project’s adoption of the Business Source License.

> Pekko recently released Apache Pekko 1.0.0-incubating, which enabled us to already use it in Flink 1.18 - just in time.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Pekko recently released Apache Pekko 1.0.1-incubating, which enabled us to already use it in Flink 1.18 - just in time.
```

---
authors:
- JingGe:
  name: "Jing Ge"
  twitter: jingengineer
- KonstantinKnauf:
  name: "Konstantin Knauf"
  twitter: snntrable
- SergeyNuyanzin:
  name: "Sergey Nuyanzin"
  twitter: uckamello
- QingshengRen:
  name: "Qingsheng Ren"
  twitter: renqstuite

> date: "2023-10-10T08:00:00Z"

Reviewer 8: Please adjust the date when merging

Reviewer 2: and the date in the file name

sqlline> !connect jdbc:flink://localhost:8083
Enter username for jdbc:flink://localhost:8083:
Enter password for jdbc:flink://localhost:8083:
0: jdbc:flink://localhost:8083> CREATE TABLE T(
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>      a INT,
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>      b VARCHAR(10)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>  ) WITH (
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>      'connector' = 'filesystem',
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>      'path' = 'file:///tmp/T.csv',
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>      'format' = 'csv'
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)>  );
No rows affected (0.122 seconds)
0: jdbc:flink://localhost:8083> INSERT INTO T VALUES (1, 'Hi'), (2, 'Hello');
+----------------------------------+
|              job id              |
+----------------------------------+
| fbade1ab4450fc57ebd5269fdf60dcfd |
+----------------------------------+
1 row selected (1.282 seconds)
0: jdbc:flink://localhost:8083> SELECT * FROM T;
+---+-------+
| a |   b   |
+---+-------+
| 1 | Hi    |
| 2 | Hello |
+---+-------+
2 rows selected (1.955 seconds)
0: jdbc:flink://localhost:8083>
```

**More Information**
* [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/table/jdbcdriver/) 

> * [FLIP-293: Introduce Flink Jdbc Driver For Sql Gateway](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-293%3A+Introduce+Flink+Jdbc+Driver+For+Sql+Gateway)

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
* [FLIP-293: Introduce Flink Jdbc Driver For SQL Gateway](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-293%3A+Introduce+Flink+Jdbc+Driver+For+Sql+Gateway)
```

### Stored Procedure Support for Flink Connectors

Stored procedures have been an indispensable tool in traditional databases,
offering a convenient way to encapsulate complex logic for data manipulation
and administrative tasks. They also offer the potential for enhanced
performance, since they can trigger the handling of data operations directly
within an external database. Other popular data systems like Trino and Iceberg
automate and simplify common maintenance tasks into small sets of procedures,
which greatly reduces users' administrative burden.

This new update primarily targets developers of Flink connectors, who can now
predefine custom stored procedures into connectors via the Catalog interface.
The primary benefit to users is that connector-specific tasks that previously
may have required writing custom Flink code can now be replaced with simple
calls that encapsulate, standardize, and potentially optimize the underlying
operations. Users can execute procedures using the familiar `CALL` syntax, and
discover a connector's available procedures with `SHOW PROCEDURES`. Stored
procedures within connectors improves the extensibility of Flink's SQL and

> Table APIs, and should unlock smoother data access and management for users.

Reviewer 12: Is it possible to add an example in here?
"
Users can use the Call statement to call the built-in stored procedures provide by Catalog directly (Note: For the built-in  stored procedures in Catalog, please refer to the documentation of the corresponding Catalog).
For example, you can use the following Call statement to perform a compaction operation on a [Paimon](https://paimon.apache.org/) table.
```sql
CREATE TABLE `paimon`.`default`.`T` (
  id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY NOT ENFORCED,
  dt STRING, -- format 'yyyy-MM-dd'
  v STRING
);

-- use catalog before call procedures
USE CATALOG `paimon`;

-- compact the whole table using call statement
CALL sys.compact('default.T');
```
"

**More Information**
- [Documentation on TRUNCATE](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/table/sql/truncate/)
- [Documentation on CREATE OR REPLACE](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/table/sql/create/#create-or-replace-table)
- [Documentation on ALTER TABLE](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/table/sql/alter/#alter-table)
- [FLIP-302: Support TRUNCATE TABLE statement in batch mode](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-302%3A+Support+TRUNCATE+TABLE+statement+in+batch+mode)
- [FLIP-303: Support REPLACE TABLE AS SELECT statement](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-303%3A+Support+REPLACE+TABLE+AS+SELECT+statement)
- [FLIP-305: Support atomic for CREATE TABLE AS SELECT(CTAS) statement](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-305%3A+Support+atomic+for+CREATE+TABLE+AS+SELECT%28CTAS%29+statement)

### Time Traveling

Flink supports the time travel SQL syntax for querying historical versions of data that allows users to specify a point 
in time and retrieve the data and schema of a table as it appeared at that time. With time travel, users can easily 

> analyze and compare historical versions of data.

Reviewer 12: Is it possible to add an example in here ? Like some thing:
"
For example, a user can query a table at a specified point in time with the following statement;
```sql
-- Query the table `tb` for data on November 11, 2022
SELECT * FROM tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TIMESTAMP '2022-11-11 00:00:00';
```

**More information**

> - [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/table/sql/queries/time-travel/)

Reviewer 2: this link is not valid

Reviewer 5: Not at the moment, but when the 1.18 docs will be released and pointed as `flink-docs-stable`, it will work. Currently the following one is valid: https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.18/docs/dev/table/sql/queries/time-travel/

IMO we may hardcode the 1.18 docs here as this is the 1.18 release notes, one thing that can happen if someone checks the link N release later and if the docs got restructured or removed by then, it may not point where it should have benn, but I do not have a strong preference.

Author: Done.

- [FLIP-308: Support Time Travel](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-308%3A+Support+Time+Travel)

## Streaming Execution Improvements

### Support Operator-Level State TTL in Table API & SQL

Starting from Flink 1.18, Table API and SQL users can set state time-to-live (TTL) individually for stateful operators.
This means that for scenarios like stream regular joins, users can now set different TTLs for the left and right 
streams. In previous versions, state expiration could only be controlled at the pipeline level using the configuration 
`table.exec.state.ttl`. With the introduction of operator-level state retention, users can now optimize resource 
usage according to their specific requirements.

**More Information**

> - [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/table/concepts/overview/#configure-operator-level-state-ttl)

Reviewer 2: This is a valid link but I am not seeing information about configuring operator level state here.

Reviewer 5: I just responded to the other link related comment, this falls into the same category. :)

- [FLIP-292: Enhance COMPILED PLAN to support operator-level state TTL configuration](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-292%3A+Enhance+COMPILED+PLAN+to+support+operator-level+state+TTL+configuration)

### Watermark Alignment and Idleness Detection in SQL

> You can now configure [watermark alignment](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/datastream/event-time/generating_watermarks/#watermark-alignment) 

Reviewer 2: I think this link should be https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/datastream/event-time/generating_watermarks/#watermark-alignment-_beta_

further improving Flink's batch performance.

#### Runtime Filter for Flink SQL

Runtime filter is a common method for optimizing Join performance. It is designed to dynamically generate filter 
conditions for certain Join queries at runtime to reduce the amount of scanned or shuffled data, avoid unnecessary I/O 
and network transmission, and speed up the query. We introduced runtime filters in Flink 1.18, and verified its 
effectiveness through the TPC-DS benchmark, and observed up to 3x speedup for some queries by enabling this feature.

#### Operator Fusion Codegen for Flink SQL

Operator Fusion Codegen improves the execution performance of a query by fusing an operator DAG into a single optimized 
operator that eliminates virtual function calls, leverages CPU registers for intermediate data and reduces the 
instruction cache miss. As a general technical optimization, we verified its effectiveness through TPC-DS, and 
only some batch operators (Calc, HashAgg, and HashJoin) completed fusion codegen support in version 1.18, getting 
significant performance gains on some query.

Note that both features are considered experimental and disabled by default in Flink 1.18. 

> They can be enabled by using `table.optimizer.runtime-filter.enabled` and `able.exec.operator-fusion-codegen.enabled` 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
They can be enabled by using `table.optimizer.runtime-filter.enabled` and `table.exec.operator-fusion-codegen.enabled` 
```

<img src="/img/blog/2023-10-10-release-1.18.0/rescaling_performance.png" style="width:90%;margin:15px">
</div>

**More Information**
* [FLINK-32326](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-32326)
* [FLINK-32345](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-32345)

# Support for Java 17 

Java 17 was released in 2021 and is the latest long-term support (LTS) release of Java with an end-of-life in 2029. 
So, it was about time that Apache Flink added support for it. What does this mean concretely? As of Flink 1.18, you can
now run Apache Flink on Java 17 and the [official Docker repository](https://hub.docker.com/_/flink) includes an image 
based on Java 17.

    docker pull flink:1.18.0-java17

If your cluster runs on Java 17, this of course, also allows you to use Java 17 features in your user programs and to
compile it to a target version of Java 17.

**More Information**
* [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/deployment/java_compatibility/)
* [FLINK-15736](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-15736)

# Others Improvements

## Production-Ready Watermark Alignment

Supported as “Beta” since Flink 1.16 and Flink 1.17, 

> [watermark alignment](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/datastream/event-time/generating_watermarks/#watermark-alignment) 

Reviewer 2: I think the link should be https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/dev/datastream/event-time/generating_watermarks/#watermark-alignment-_beta_

has been thoroughly tested at scale in the real world. Over that time the community has collected and addressed 
bugs and performance issues as they were discovered. With the resolution of these issues, we are now happy to recommend 
watermark alignment for general use.

**More Information**
* [FLINK-32548](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-32548)

## Pluggable Failure Handling

Apache Flink serves as the foundation for numerous stream processing platforms at companies like Apple, Netflix or Uber. It is also the basis for various commercial stream processing services. Therefore, its ability to easily integrate into the wider ecosystem of these internal as well as vendor platforms becomes increasingly important. The catalog modification listener and pluggable failure handlers fall into this category of improvements.

**More Information**
* [Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/deployment/advanced/failure_enrichers/)
* [FLIP-304: Pluggable Failure Enrichers](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-304%3A+Pluggable+Failure+Enrichers)

## SQL Client Quality of Life Improvements

> In 1.18 the SQL client received a collection of usability improvements: 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In 1.18 the SQL Client received a collection of usability improvements: 
```

> * The client is now more colorful with the ability to enable SQL syntax highlighting and switching among 7 different 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* The SQL Client is now more colorful with the ability to enable SQL syntax highlighting and switching among 7 different 
```

are bug fixes, a smarter optimizer and performance improvements. On a parser level, it now allows joins to be 
grouped into trees using parentheses (mentioned in SQL-92) e.g. `SELECT * FROM a JOIN (b JOIN c ON b.x = c.x) ON a.y = c.y` 
also see [CALCITE-35](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CALCITE-35). In addition, the upgrade to Calcite 1.31+ has 
unblocked the support of Session Windows via Table-Valued Functions (see 
[CALCITE-4865](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CALCITE-4865), 
[FLINK-24024](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-24024)) and as a corollary the deprecation of the legacy 
group window aggregations. 
Due to [CALCITE-4861](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CALCITE-4861) Flink's casting behavior has slightly changed. 
Some corner cases might behave differently now: For example, casting from FLOAT/DOUBLE 9234567891.12 to INT/BIGINT has 
now Java behavior for overflows.

**More Information**
* [FLINK-27998](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-27998)
* [FLINK-28744](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-28744)
* [FLINK-29319](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-29319)

# Important Deprecations

> In preparation of the release of Flink 2.0 next year, the community has decided to officially deprecated multiple APIs 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
In preparation for the release of Flink 2.0 next year, the community has decided to officially deprecate multiple APIs 
```

> that were approach end of life for a while.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
that were approaching end of life for a while.
```

* [``SourceFunction``](https://github.com/apache/flink/blob/master/flink-streaming-java/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/streaming/api/functions/source/SourceFunction.java) 

>   is now officially deprecated and will be dropped in Flink 2.0. If you are still using a connector that is build on 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
  is now officially deprecated and will be dropped in Flink 2.0. If you are still using a connector that is built on 
```

  top of ``SourceFunction`` please migrate it to 
  [``Source``](https://github.com/apache/flink/blob/master/flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/Source.java).
  ``SinkFunction`` is not officially deprecated, but it is also approaching end-of-life and will be superseded by 
  ``SinkV2``.
* [Queryable State](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/dev/datastream/fault-tolerance/queryable_state/) 
  is now officially deprecated and will be dropped in Flink 2.0. 
* [The DataSet API](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/dev/dataset/overview/) is now 

>   officially deprecated. Users are recommended to migrated to the DataStream API with 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
  officially deprecated. Users are recommended to migrate to the DataStream API with 
```
